Hello, everyone.
In this video, I want to give you a tour of the code light interface.
The version of Code Light that I'm using here is 17 .3.0.
This version is more recent than the versions that I used when I recorded the videos for the course.
Overall, they are very, very similar.
Sure, you're going to see a couple of differences in the user interface.
Some things have been cleaned up and made more streamlined, but the basic functionality of the IDE,
namely creating workspaces, creating projects, editing the code, building and running the code have
not changed.
So let me give you a quick tour here.
When you first open up code light, if you don't have a workspace already open since the last time you
saved it, you'll get a screen that looks like this.
Over here on the left side, you'll see the workspace view.
This is where the workspace and projects will reside.
There aren't any open now because I don't have a workspace open yet.
Over here in the center, you see these four big buttons.
Again, that might change in the future, but right now we're going to use two of them.
We're going to open an existing workspace and we're going to create a new workspace down at the bottom.
We can see recently opened workspaces.
So you can see that I've already opened three workspaces and I did that.
So you can see something down here.
Very likely the first time you run code light, you're not going to have any workspaces.
So this section down here will be empty.
So suppose I want to load a workspace, I can open a workspace and navigate to it, or I'm just going
to click Workspace two right here, which is a workspace that I created with several projects in it
just to walk you through this interface.
So I'm just going to double click that and you can see that Code Light has loaded Workspace two into
the workspace view.
Workspace two has four projects in it.
Project one, project two, three and four.
Each one of those is a standalone C plus plus application.
We can expand each of them and you can see each one has a source folder and within the source folder
they each have a Main.cpp source file.
That's where our C plus plus code goes.
Later in the course, we're going to have projects that have multiple CP files in them.
Also you can see that project one is bold and italicized that tells you that project one is the active
project.
The way that code light works is that it builds and runs the active project.
So when we come up and build things in a minute, it's always going to build the active project.
So it's really important that we understand what we're building because we could be editing Project
four and then pressing build thinking that Project four is being built.
But if Project One is the active project, project one will be built.
It sounds confusing, but it really isn't just make active what you're working on.
It's really, really straightforward.
Okay, so that's the workspace view.
We've got some tabs up here and the only one we're going to use is workspace.
Don't worry about the rest.
An IDE or an integrated development environment such as Code Lite is designed for small programs like
we're going to do, and it's also designed for very large programs.
So it's got a lot of bells and whistles that we're not going to use.
These are the kinds of things you would use in programs that are thousands of files and very, very
complicated.
So in this case, we're just going to keep it really, really simple.
This is all about learning C plus plus more than it is about learning code lite.
So there's my workspace.
You can see that I have this little paper airplane here.
And when you click that, it collapses everything.
Sometimes we've got a lot of projects in here and they all get expanded and it's really hard to find
stuff.
So if you click that, it just collapses everything.
Now I can expand whatever I like again.
Also, if I'm somewhere down here, let's say, and I want to go to my active project, I can just click
that home icon and that takes me to my active project right away and opens it up.
So that's kind of handy.
And you've already seen the settings.
You can click the project you want and you can click that little wrench and it gives you your settings.
We did that when we installed and configured code light a few videos ago.
All right.
So that's the workspace view.
Now, this big area right here in the center that's got nothing in it right now.
This is your editor.
In order to use the editor, you need to click on a C plus plus file or something in the project.
So in this case, I'm going to double click on main.cpp.
And it opened it up and you can see this is very similar to the program we wrote during the installs.
Hello from Project one.
Makes sense.
Now let's say I want to open up Project two and I want to open up that source file that loaded up as
well.
And it says Hello from Project two up here in the tab.
We can tab between those two.
And as I do that, you can see this blue bar over here in the Workspace view jumping to the appropriate
file in the project.
We can turn that off by clicking that little link right here.
I don't know why you would want to do that.
I love the fact that I can see exactly where it's at, so I'm just going to leave that alone.
We can open up the rest of these projects as well.
Let me expand all of these and I'll open up Project three and Project four.
So now you can see that I've got four project Main.cpp open up here and it's pretty easy to see which
project they belong to and you can actually hover over it and it tells you the path to the workspace
and the project and the file within the project.
Okay, so that's great.
When I modify the code and again, I'm going to go.
Let me collapse all of these and I'm going to go to my active project and there's Project One.
So that's where I'm at right now.
I can close these up now just to get them out of the way.
Right now I'm working on Project One.
When I make any changes to this file.
For example, suppose I added a space at the end of this line.
We get this little red dot right there, right next to the project name in the tab that tells you that
this file is called dirty.
So in other words, what I'm working on right now is not what is on the file system.
So it's telling you right there, hey, be sure to save this if you really want this updated on the
disk so we can save with file, save file or Ctrl s, or you can click on this little save icon right
up here on the bar.
And I'll talk more about that control bar in a moment.
So I can do that.
I can press Ctrl s and that little red dot goes away.
If you're on Linux.
It's a little black dot on most Linux distributions, but again, it doesn't matter what color it is,
but you're not going to see that little extra close.
So that's my project one.
Let me remove that line.
And again, you can see that that's red and I'm going to save it again.
So this is how we would edit our program.
I've made this font large so that you can see it better on video.
All of that is in the settings, colors and fonts.
If you click that, you can change the fonts, the colors, the theme that you're using, whether it's
a light theme or a dark theme and so forth, I'm just going to leave this alone.
We've already learned how to create projects.
We've learned how to create workspaces.
We did that in the installation video.
So that process is exactly the same.
Now how do we build and run?
Well, let me expand this right now.
Project one is the active project so we can come up to build and we've got a couple of options here.
You can see we can run, we can build the project, we can rebuild it, we can clean it, we can do
a whole bunch of stuff, right?
We're only going to be using a couple of these, actually, probably just one of these most of the time
in order to create an executable file that we can run, we need to build the project.
And in order to run an executable file, we have to have a good build.
No syntax errors, no other errors.
We can do that by pressing F7 to build the project.
So let me do that.
And the output view opens up down here.
And I'm just going to scroll this up just a little bit, move it up so you can see it all.
The output view opens up and we get our build output here.
You can see that build output is in this build tab.
If you post on the Q&A forum saying, hey, I've got some kind of error, it's not building, I'm going
to ask you to show me the build output because that tells me what's going on.
So this is the build output notice.
Successful build, no errors.
Once we have a successful build, we can come up to build and run it.
Now it's going to ask me, Would you like to build the active project before executing it?
I've already built it so I don't have to build it again.
You certainly could.
And if you want to always do one of these, just remember your choice and click that little check mark
and it's not going to pester you all the time with this little pop up.
So let me execute it.
Building and Running Project one.
So I expect hello from Project one to display on my terminal, my command prompt execute.
And there you go.
Hello from Project One.
I should also mention that the process for Mac Linux and Windows is exactly the same.
So everything I'm talking about in this video applies to all of the operating systems.
When we're done, we press enter and we close that.
So that's that.
Now we can modify the look and feel of.
So for example, suppose I don't want my output view over here.
Suppose I want my output view over here on the right, I can grab this blue bar.
It may not be blue on your end, but I can grab that bar and just drag it over here.
You can see it's lighting up right there, so I'm just going to drop it there.
So there's my output view.
And now suppose I want my workspace view to be above that so I can just move that over there.
So now I can have my workspace view over here, my output view over here.
The view menu option gives you all kinds of options.
For example, I can turn my output pane off, in which case you can see it's just disappeared over here
from the right and I can turn it back on.
I can turn my workspace pane off and back on.
This is totally up to you what your preferences are.
As far as the look and feel of your work environment.
We can also do a view with the main toolbar orientation.
That's the toolbar.
That's this toolbar right up there, the one we see with the plus and the bug and all that.
These are just shortcuts to things I've been doing.
We can add a new file, we can open a file, we can save a file.
That little hammer builds the active project here.
We can stop a build, which is not a big deal for us because our builds are pretty fast.
But when we have really, really large.
C plus plus programs builds can sometimes take an hour, believe it or not, or longer.
So sometimes we want to stop the build.
For whatever reason.
We can clean the active project.
And I'll show you what that is in just a moment.
And we can run the active project and certainly we can debug and we'll talk about debugging in a different
video.
So these are the main functions here.
If for whatever reason you just get lost in this interface, you start moving these things around and
oh my goodness, I don't like what I've done.
And if having trouble getting back, you can always just go to view and restore layout and that'll bring
it right back to factory default basically.
So as I said, there's all the view issues here.
If you don't like that main toolbar up here at the top and you want it on the left, you can just go
to view main toolbar orientation left and then it's going to say, Do you want to reload code light?
Sometimes it's going to want to restart.
So let's say yes, you can see what it's like.
It closes up, it opens up again.
And now you can see that the toolbar is over here on the left.
So again, personal preference is there all the way around with the views.
So now let's talk about the build again.
In this case, if I want to build, what that means is I want to build the active project.
So what code light is going to do?
It's going to go out there and it's going to see first, has it already been built?
If it has been built, then it's going to say, has anything changed in the source code here since the
last build?
If the answer is no, then it's not going to rebuild it.
It doesn't need to rebuild it since the build is current.
Makes sense.
Now if we have made any changes or it's the first time we build, it's going to certainly build it.
So that's what Build does.
Clean.
The project removes any intermediate files, the executables, it just basically clears out everything.
Not your source code, just the build products cleans out everything.
So the next time we build, we have a clean build.
In other words, there's nothing pre built.
Rebuild.
Does both of those essentially.
First, it cleans and then it builds.
That's what I would encourage you to use throughout the course Rebuild project.
The reason that we don't use rebuild project in industry very much is because our projects can be very,
very large.
And if I do a clean and then a build every time, it could take 20 30 minutes, whereas the build itself
is only going to build things that have changed since the last build.
So they're much more efficient.
But for this course I would encourage you to select Rebuild Project.
So let me do that.
I'm going to click Rebuild Project and you can see that the output view opened up down here.
You probably didn't see it, but right before the build happened, the clean also happened and the clean
kind of looks like this.
I'm going to select Build clean project and you can see that means remove.
So it's removing all the files in the build debug folder, which are all the intermediate files, all
the binary files essentially.
So that's the clean.
Now we can come up to build again.
Now remember, let me rebuild it.
Now when you see a build that includes G plus plus X, that's a real build.
That's actually building the intermediate files.
Okay.
I hope this makes sense.
Now, if I try to build again just to build notice, nothing happened.
There was no G plus plus command in there.
That's because the project was already built.
Code light realized I don't need to build it.
It's already current.
So my advice is to always use rebuild.
Okay, now we can do it at the project level, the active project.
Or we can build the entire workspace or clean an entire workspace or rebuild an entire workspace.
So let me show you how to clean the entire workspace.
You can see that I just cleaned the workspace.
So it's removing files from every single project.
So you can see Project four.
Project two, Project three, Project one.
Now I can rebuild each project.
I'm going to rebuild the workspace and it's going to build everything for each project within the workspace.
We're probably not going to use that.
I just wanted to show you that it was there.
Okay, perfect.
Now, obviously I can run Project one again if I make project for the active project and I can do that
by just double clicking it just like that and I can run it and go to build and run.
I don't need to build it Since I've built everything in the workspace already, I'll just execute and
we should see Hello from Project four and that's exactly what we see.
Great.
All right.
So that covers the building, the debugger I'll cover in a separate video later on in the class.
Let me close this output view down a little bit.
We also have searching, for example, I could search for things within files, across files.
I know that all these programs have a main in it so I can find in files and I can say I want to search
for Main.
And press find.
And then the output view again opens up, this time with the search tab highlighted.
And you can see that I've got a main in Project one and Project two and project three and so forth.
And if I want to go to, let's say, Project Ones main, I could just find Project one and click here.
And there it is.
Project Once Main, I can go to Project Two's main and Project two opens up up here and there.
It's been so it's pretty handy to find things across files in your entire workspace in this case.
We can clear all this by just clicking right there.
That little broom and clear it up.
And that's my output view.
It's got several uses.
This build tab is probably the one we're going to use the most and it's probably the most important
one because that'll tell us if there's compiler errors and so forth.
All right.
So let me close this back up.
Now the plug ins.
Let's talk about that for a moment.
There's really two plug ins I want you to activate.
They may be activated already.
They may not be.
But let me show you how to do it.
You go to plug ins and manage plug ins.
And let me close this down here to give us a little bit more room.
Let's go to plug ins, manage plug ins.
And there's a whole bunch of plug ins.
And plug ins are just little external pieces of code and little programs that code like uses.
So the ones that I want you to check off for sure are language server, plug in, make sure that's checked.
And down here where it says wizards, make sure that's checked because we're going to use that later
in the course.
That's it.
Hit.
Okay.
And when you come to plug ins, it might ask you to restart, but you'll see those two plug ins here
and the language server.
You can basically go to settings and make sure that everything is enabled.
It should be by default and then you could restart the language server.
And what that does is that helps you do code completion.
So as I type, it's going to help me by helping me complete the code.
For example, if I typed in some variable name here and again, we'll talk all about variable names
later.
Let's create an integer called age.
Let's say my age, something like that, and put a semicolon here.
Then later on, if I want to use my age, I can just type my underscore and it pops it up for me and
I can just press tab and use it so I don't have to type.
It also allows us let me delete this.
It also allows us to use some of the C plus plus keywords and functions.
So for example, if I wanted to use a double, I could just do that press tab and create a variable
name.
So again, it makes it very, very handy.
It's kind of finicky sometimes.
Sometimes it wants to work, sometimes it doesn't want to work.
What I've found is if it doesn't work, just rebuild.
Rebuild.
And then it kind of kicks it in.
So that's the plug ins, the settings.
There's tons of settings here.
We've already seen some of the colors and fonts, the preferences.
We've got whether we want to display line numbers over here in the editor or not.
We can turn that on and off, highlight the current line number like that.
You can see seven is bold.
Again, I just leave all this alone because the default settings are pretty good.
Close that up.
You can look through there.
But again, don't just start clicking on things because your interface is going to get pretty crazy.
So let me just leave that alone.
Then the other thing you're going to see in your code is this little red thing, and it might be red
or it might not be red depending on the operating system, but you'll see some kind of little icon here
where we can click it and it collapses that.
So you can see that it collapses that.
Now that doesn't look very useful here, but when you've got a lot of code, let's say you have five,
600 lines of code and you've got parts of your program that you're really not interested in right now,
you're working on a different section.
You can collapse certain sections to kind of just hide them, sort of it's not really hiding them because
they're there, but just kind of get them out of my way right now while I work on this other section.
The code is still there.
You can see from the dots that the code is still there and we can always expand it whenever we like.
Okay.
So pretty much covers the basics that I wanted to cover.
Really important.
Don't forget about view restore layout.
If your layout gets really wonky, just go back to view and restore your layout and you're good to go.
As far as creating workspaces and creating projects, we've already done that before in the installation
videos, so that should be pretty straightforward.
If you have a workspace open and you try to create a new one, it won't let you make sure you close
the workspace first and then you're allowed to create one.
So here's a Section 19 workspace.
This is a workspace we're going to use later in the course.
Let me open it up to give you an example of a workspace with a bunch of projects in it.
So you can see Section 19.
That's again later on in the course.
This is the section we're going to use, and this is the section on i o on how to use files and how
to do things like that.
So we've got a lot of different projects in here.
Each one has a description main.cpp and this is some of the code that we'll write later on.
I know it looks maybe a little bit daunting right now, but don't worry, it'll be fine.
I can close that up.
And in this case, challenge.
One solution is the default project.
Here is the challenge.
One solution solution.
So there's the code and you can see here where it really is useful to use code folding and fold some
of this stuff and kind of get it out of the way.
So for example, there's my main that's my whole program, right?
But let's say I only want to look at structs and I'm only looking at my structure.
So they show up really, really cleanly without going through hundreds and hundreds of lines of code.
In this case, that's my challenge.
One solution Suppose I want to run it well, I'm going to come to build.
Remember, it is the active project because it's bold and italicized.
I'm going to go to build.
I'm going to select Rebuild Project.
You can see my output view down here.
It's doing G plus plus X.
It's using everything I need to use.
Then I'm going to come to build run project right there.
Just execute.
I'm going to get a command prompt window, and that's the output from this program that we're going
to do later on in the course.
Okay, so that's it.
This gives you a pretty good feeling for the interface.
The entire code, light interface.
There's a lot of stuff I didn't cover, obviously, but I'm not going to use any of that stuff that
I didn't cover in the course.
IDs, as I said, are usually used for very large programs, but they can also be used for small programs.
We're just not going to use all the bells and whistles.
So you have any questions, please let me know and I'll see you in the next video and we'll start coding.